On the latest Masters in Business
podcast, my conversation with Morgan
Housel. I've known Morgan for I don't
know, 15 years
and I've loved all of his writing and
his books.
The Psychology of Money is is one of the
best bestsellers in all of personal
finance coming up on 10 million copies
sold. Amazing. Same as ever. Timeless
stories about human nature. The new
book, The Art of Spending Money, Simple
Choices for a Richer Life, drops today.
I thought this conversation is one of
our best. Morgan is a deeply thoughtful
person. Everything he says
comes from both experience and
academics.
I love the way he puts stories together
with lessons. I thought the conversation
was fascinating and I think you will
also. With no further ado, my
conversation with author Morgan Housel.
Morgan Housel, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Good to see you, Barry. Thanks for
having me. Good to see you. It's always
a pleasure to to have you.
Let's for people who may not be familiar
with you and your career, let's give
them a little bit of background. You go
to University of Southern California
where you get a BA in economics. What
was the career plan? The plan all along
was to be an investment banker or a
hedge fund manager. The reason why is
every or very many young ambitious young
20-something males, particularly in the
mid-2000s,
>> Mhm. that was the thing to do. If you go
back to the early mid-2000s, tech really
wasn't that much of a thing yet. Of
course, it was around, but it didn't
have the money, the prestige, the growth
that it did.
>> Especially after the crash in 2008.
>> finance was the thing. If you were young
and ambitious and wanted to make a lot
of money, you went to Wall Street, you
worked at Goldman Sachs or investment
banker. That's what I wanted to do. Plan
A, B, and C. Didn't want anything to do.
I got an investment banking internship
in what would have been, I guess, my
junior year and it was like, this is it.
[clears throat] This is the dream. Here
we go. This is awesome. Within 10
minutes of the first day, I knew it was
not for me. 10 minutes it took 10
minutes for me to be like, nope, nope,
that's not going to work. I'm
>> That's hilarious. I can do good work,
but not under the hazing-style pressure
that was so prevalent in banks back
then. And it's not that I didn't have
the work ethic for it. It was just it
seemed like such a broken culture that I
wanted nothing to do with.
>> It's so funny you said that. I had the
same experience as a first-year
associate and a summer associate in a
law firm and I'm like, oh, this is a
horrible lifestyle. Wait.
You're in your 20s. Why do I want to be
spending every weekend in the law
library? It was miserable.
>> Yeah. They had a quote on the first day
of my investment banking internship and
they said, the rule here is, if you
don't come to work on Saturday, don't
bother coming back on Sunday.
And I went, nope, nope. What about
Monday? That's not for me. That's not
for me.
>> That's great. So, I don't have to work
weekends. Fantastic. See you Monday,
right? So then I so then I didn't know
what to do and I was really adrift and
and lost. And then I graduated 2008
financial crisis, world is in flames,
nobody is hiring and I stumbled
haphazardly,
not by any plan or strategy, out of
desperation, I took a job as a finance
writer at The Motley Fool. So, were you
an analyst or or a finance writer?
>> a writer from day one. I was still in
college at the time. Uh-huh.
>> And started covering banking stocks at
The Motley Fool in 2007.
And uh
>> Good timing. And I've I've been a writer
ever since. So, I'm curious
talking about being a hedge fund manager
or an investment banker. I know your
early life, you were both a ski bum and
a car valet. Yeah. Parking really
expensive cars. Did that have any
influence on your initial erroneous
career choice?
>> It had so much influence because I grew
up in a middle-class family, great town,
but not not a wealthy town. Not not not
poor, not out in the sticks, but a
decidedly middle-class town in
California.
>> Yeah. Uh just outside of Lake Tahoe,
California. Also before tech money
infiltrated Lake Tahoe. So, back then it
was truly just a small little mountain
town. It's not anymore cuz tech money
came up. But um and so I didn't have
much concept of wealth because in the
town that I grew up in uh regular people
had old pickup trucks and rich people
had new pickup trucks. That was the
stratification of wealth. That was as
far as it got. And so but anyway, I
started working at this these fancy
hotels and all of a sudden people were
starting to come in in these cars that
just blew my mind. Not just BMWs and
Mercedes, but Ferraris, Lamborghinis
once in a while. And then I went to
college in Los Angeles, stayed working
as a valet at even nicer hotels in LA
and then it was Rolls-Royces and Aston
Martins. And it was just a level of
wealth that I didn't know existed. And
in my young, you know, 19-20-year-old
mind, it was just so appealing to me. I
was just overwhelmed with like, whatever
that is, I want it. I want some of that
immediately. And but it was also I think
I not not on on purpose, but I think I
just kind of started picking up the
little subtle clues of the psychology of
rich people. The first thing that was I
was very apparent was that a lot of them
were not that happy. A lot of them were
just kind of old, bitter, broken men
arguing with their wives. Second wives,
third wives. Third wives, right right.
Always always stressed, always barking
on the phone. And it was and it was all
the time. It was all the time. And I
remember picking up on that and being
like, hey, on one hand, I really want
that. On the other hand, like, is that
supposed to be my my my role model? Cuz
it doesn't look that great. And I know a
lot of middle-class people from the town
I grew up in who seem a hell of a lot
happier than that guy. And so I think
that was I started picking up on kind of
the psychology of wealth, not
intentionally, but it was a very good
window into that aspect of wealth
because in my little pea-sized
19-year-old brain, it was in my what I
assumed was you have so much money, you
must just be a walking ball of
happiness. That was that was the
intuition that I had, but it was so
clearly not that. So, think about that
for a second and there I have so much
stuff from your new book to that's
relevant to this, but we'll get to that
later.
Think about when you're young and
relatively broke and I grew up lower
middle class and put myself through
college and grad school and always felt
like, gee, if only I didn't have to
worry about money, how much greater my
life would be. But chasing away the lack
of money blues,
that's just a modest decrease in stress,
not the secret to happiness.
>> I think what it tends to be true and
there's no hard and fast rules here.
This is not black and white. But it
tends to be true that wealthier people
might have fewer bad days
than poor people. I don't know if they
necessarily have more good days.
Now, that is a lifestyle improvement to
have fewer bad days, to not have to
worry and stress about
making rent and health care and whatnot.
To remove that is a lifestyle
improvement, but it is not happiness. It
is different in the same way that you
and I
are fortunate enough to wake up every
morning not worrying about catching
polio. Right. Or
what you can eat that day.
>> Or what what exactly Or will you eat
that day.
>> Right. And relative to the standards of
100 years ago, that is an unbelievable
lifestyle improvement, but it's not
happiness because you and I didn't wake
up this morning thinking about it.
>> That is simply Maslow's hierarchy of
basic needs. That's different than
happiness, than contentment, which we'll
talk about.
So so let's stay with your writing at
The Motley Fool.
One of the things two of the things that
really distinguish your writing. First,
you're a great storyteller and you find
some fascinating stories. But second,
you figured out early that finance is
not so much about math as it is about
behavior. Tell us how you stumbled into
an interest in behavioral finance.
So much of this was Motley Fool's a
stock-picking organization and I'm not.
I I I I don't look down upon stock
picking, but it's not what I do. It's
not how I invest. It's not what
interests me at all. And so I kind of
had to find a little niche for myself at
The Motley Fool. They were completely in
and and they were completely supportive
of my you know, kind of black sheep-ness
being there, being like, hey, you know,
everyone else is picking stocks and I'm
just trying to do something else over
here.
>> Right. And so I had to figure out what
to do. For a while it was macro. This
was post post-financial crisis and I was
like, oh, I'm going to study the forces
of the economy and that not
intentionally, but kind of just pushed
into behavior and psychology. I think a
lot of that was as I was studying macro,
this realization and you've been a big
part of this as well of realizing that
there is nothing in a macro textbook
that will explain 2008. And so as a
writer, as I was trying to explain what
just happened in the aftermath of the
GFC, it was there's nothing in there
that explained why people did what they
did. Nothing in an economics textbook or
or the academic framework that would
explain the housing bubble that preceded
it, the behavior during the crash, the
pessimism after it. Like not much there.
But if you looked at it through the lens
of psychology or sociology or political
science or evolution, all these other
fields like had a lot to say. And and
could explain why people were doing the
things they do. So, that was just the
subtle coming to terms with the idea
that money and finance is not the study
is not the study of finance. It's a
study of how people behave with money.
So, I'm
pulling forward a quote from later in
our conversation that's dead on with
that insight. Risk has two stages.
First, when it actually hits, then when
the scars influence our subsequent
decisions. So, you you graduate into the
'08-'09
disaster.
Everybody post-financial crisis and I
shouldn't say everybody, but so many
people post-financial crisis was, hey,
that was just the first leg after March
of '09. Wait wait for the second leg.
>> Remember phrase double-dip recession?
>> That's right. Everybody said it 14 times
a day.
>> decades before.
>> Every If you go back to 2010,
particularly 2011, everybody in the
financial media said the phrase
double-dip recession every hour. It was
It was It was inevitable. It was abs-
absolutely inevitable. The other version
of this is at the end of World War 1945,
it was a foregone conclusion that nobody
disagreed with that the US economy would
fall right back into the Great
Depression. That That In the absence of
military spending, it was not just going
to contract and revert to the mean, it
was going to go back to the 1932 lows of
desperation. And in hindsight, it didn't
happen, but it was a foregone conclusion
back then. It is always the case that
the simple narrative and oftentimes a
simple narrative is just extrapolating
whatever just happened is going to be
the most appealing, the most logical, it
makes the most sense.
In the In the the cyclical nature of
economies though, like we you we all
know in hindsight what happened during
those periods that actually the end of
World War there were some mild
recessions in the late '40s and '50s.
But by and large, that was actually the
beginning of an epic boom in the '50s
and '60s. And
after the GFC, you know, 2009, 2010,
that was in the stock market and
economically the beginning of a boom.
And it's it's almost impossible to
realize that in real time as it was
almost impossible to realize in '99,
2000 that of course in tech stocks, but
also in the broader economy, that was
about as good as it gets. And once it's
about as good as it gets, that was It
was so easy to extrapolate from there,
but that was actually the end of the
good days.
>> You know, the shocking thing about the
post-financial crisis period and I I'll
take a little credit for for floating
this phrase out there. It was the most
hated bull market in history. By like
October '09, people were talking about
wait for the next 30, 40% dip. And you
mentioned hindsight, our hindsight bias
keeps us looking backwards and ignoring
the fact that hey, when is a down 50%
market in the US not a great entry
point? All right, 1929, but that is the
exception to the rule. Every other time
it's been down cut in half, I'm a buyer.
>> Right. And actually, if you go back to,
you know, 1931, '32, when the market was
down 50%, it eventually fell 89%. So, if
it was down 50%, you still lost a
fortune after that. But if you made
those purchases down 50%, 10 years
later, you were doing in absolutely
incredible. Now, that was that's cold
comfort for the the other 50% that you
continued to lose by 1932, but there's
all these cases where people say they're
long-term investors and they want to be
long-term investors. But then
particularly when they're trying to buy
the dip, if the market falls for another
90 days after that, they feel like
they've made a colossal error. So, I
find there's a huge difference. Um many
people are intellectually long-term
investors, but emotionally they're not.
And that tension is what drives a lot of
that.
>> See, I I would put a different spin on
that. I would say a lot of people
uh you know, claim to be kind of
short-term investors in the sense that
on Twitter, they're like, "Oh, this this
is this is the peak. This is the top.
The economy in Q4 is not looking They
say things like that, but if you
actually looked how they invest, like in
their
they dollar cost average into their
401ks and never sell anything. And And
that's the right approach during a
market crash. In fact, you never pick a
point as the bottom. Uh even if you put
a big chunk of your free capital, you
you should always be, "Hey, I don't know
where the bottom is.
I'll try a little in in uh 1930 and a
little more throughout '31 and '32.
Eventually, your average is going to be
far lower with than where the market is,
but you have to have a steady source of
capital and and some income." Now, I
remember in 2011 when there was the
double-dip recession and the market did
fall, I don't know, 20 or 30%. That was
probably more pessimistic in 2011 than
people were in 2009. 2011, people were
like, "This is it. This is over."
>> back down to the
>> market was plunging and the narrative
was everyone's panicking, everyone's
selling. Vanguard put out a study uh
that showed during that era, 99%
of their clients did nothing. Didn't
sell, didn't panic, didn't do any didn't
do anything. And so, the narrative of
everyone's panic, everyone's selling is
usually so completely different from
what people are actually doing. So, let
me let me share one of my favorite
quotes of yours since you're you're
talking about highs and lows. Every
market valuation is a number from today
multiplied by a story about tomorrow. I
I think that's genius. I love that
quote.
>> Thank you. You know, it's always you
know, a number from today like earnings
per share multiplied by a story about
tomorrow, like a valuation multiple. And
what's important is particularly in a
low interest rate environment um and
particularly in a in a ZIRP environment,
those stories are everything. The number
from today almost doesn't matter. The
stories are everything. That's always
been the case, but in a social media
world, the stories get bonkers. The
stories get absolutely nuts.
>> Narratives become memes.
>> Yeah, you know, Ben Graham had the quote
in the the stock market is a voting
machine and oh no, maybe it was Keynes.
Uh voting machine in the short term and
a weighing machine in the long run. But
he said that 100 years ago and it's
still true. But there because of how the
world works today, stocks can remain
voted on, not necessarily weighed for
probably decades. Tesla has been a voted
upon stock, not a weighed upon stock
for its entire existence. And maybe that
will change someday, but I think in
previous eras, in the Ben Graham era or
even not even, you know, 20 or 30 years
ago,
you could have brief, momentary flashes
of insanity. And that was probably the
the late '90s. You had, you know, 18
months of just pure insanity where
everything was narrative-driven. It
wasn't really earnings-driven. And now
you can have that going on for very long
periods of time. I mean, how long has
has Hertz and GameStop been
been meme stocks? Like years, five five
years.
>> is still active?
>> it still a Reddit
>> a thing. It's still It's still a thing.
Maybe not to the extent that it was, but
these stocks did not revert all the way
back. They still have this cult meme
following. And so, the the point being,
it's always a number from today
multiplied by a story about tomorrow.
But because the world we live in,
interest rates and social media, the
stories get insane. So, let me mix your
Keynes quote with uh your own quote. In
the short run, markets are probability
machines. In the long run, they're
narrative machines. That That's a good
uh blend of you and Keynes. There are
worse people to uh to to marry. All
right, one or two more um questions in
this uh segment before we move on. Um
I'm you you address one of my favorite
pet peeves about uncertainty in a in a
sentence that I love. Quote, "There's
rarely more or less economic
uncertainty, just changes in how
ignorant people are to potential risks."
That That sums it up per- perfectly. I
hate the uncertainty meme cuz by
definition, the future is always
inherently uncertain.
>> Yeah. I mean, there have been some
academics who have tried to make
uncertainty indexes where they make it
and you can put it on a chart to measure
the amount of uncertainty. And there's
various ways that they do it in terms of
like newspaper narratives and changes in
in economic policy and to to map out
uncertainty. And what's so fascinating
to me is if you look at these indexes,
which I think are pretty rationally put
together, um it shows that uncertainty
is the lowest, as in certainty was the
highest at two periods in modern times.
I guess three periods. One is right
before 9/11, the other is right before
the GFC, and the other is right before
COVID.
That was when purportedly we understood
the future in the greatest degree. And
if you go back in time,
I'm going to tell you there was a lot of
certainty in late '99.
>> Yeah. Stocks grew to the sky and you go
back to March '09, there was certainty
that stocks were going to zero. And so,
what we know in hindsight is that those
three periods, just before 9/11, just
before 2008,
and just before COVID, were the most
uncertain. That was when your view of
the future was completely and utterly
wrong, no matter who you were or how
smart you were. And so, I
I think it's true that there is never
more or less uncertainty. It's just we
go through periods where we are more
ignorant and more confident in our
ability to forecast than others. Let's
talk about luck. Um I just wrote
something about this and found a quote
of yours afterwards that I would have
loved to use. Um most people when they
talk about luck, increasing the surface
area of your luck, luck is where
preparation meets opportunity.
>> Your definition of luck recognizes that
it's something fundamentally outside of
your control. Quote, "You can't believe
in risk without also believing in luck
cuz they're fundamentally the same
thing, an acknowledgement that so much
is outside of your control."
>> Yeah, when people say like, "Oh, the
harder I work, the luckier I get." You
know, those kind of They They seem like
like benign quotes. I'm like, "No,
that's not what luck is. If you can go
out of your way to increase it, it is
not luck. It's hard work."
>> It's hard work and skill, right?
>> a value. I I I commend you for it, but
it's not luck. Luck is you're born in
this era. Luck is your parents told you
X, Y, and Z. Luck is you haphazardly met
this person. You did not do anything
intentionally to do it. It was
completely outside of your your control.
The biggest of which is where and when
you were born that have an unbelievable
impact on this. Bill Gross, a great bond
manager, I'm sure he's been on this show
before.
Um he he he spoke about this one time
that, you know, he was a bond manager
from the early you know,
the bulk of his career was during the
largest decline in interest rates that's
ever occurred. And he wondered himself
in this piece that he wrote many years
ago of like, would he have had the
success he did if he was born 10 years
earlier or 10 years later?
Would Buffett have had the same success
if he was born 10 years earlier or 10
years later? I would I would venture to
say the answer is no.
Are both of those people very hard
working, very intelligent, able to
capture opportunity? Yes. Uh were they
also unbelievably lucky in something
they had no control over, which is when
they were born? Yes, as well. I'm trying
to remember the book that mentioned it's
not a coincidence that so many of the
best-known entrepreneurs of our era were
born post-war World War II, mid-'50s.
Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, it goes through
a whole list and just being born into
that vacuum when there was massive
societal change, economic change,
technological change, that's what
created the option of starting a whole
new company in a in a brand new space.
>> Yeah, and if Steve Jobs was born 20
years later, he still would have been
extremely successful. He's just built
different, of course. Um but to the
degree that he was, almost certainly
not. So, I think rather than luck cuz
people don't like that phrase. It makes
you sound jealous and bitter of other
people. I think the phrase to use is
what is repeatable.
What have you done in the past that you
can do again?
And if if, you know, what in in in your
life and in your in in your world, if
you started over tomorrow with no money,
no name recognition, no contacts, could
you repeat what you've done? And
sometimes the answer is yes, so that's
not luck. I'm going to say no. For me
personally, I think it's no. I think
right place, right time and and got
I I literally just finished a chapter
for someone else's book on how random so
much of the world is. And I have to tell
you, the first couple of times a
billionaire tells you how important luck
was, you kind of shrug it off as, "Hey,
these guys are little false humility."
Um
the person who disabused me of that
notion was Howard Marks. Cuz he said,
"You
you have to be smart, you have to be
hard working, but you also have to get
lucky." And I'm like, "Come on, Howard.
Why do you say that? You know, look at
what you've done since you graduated
Columbia Business School." And his
answer was
"Everybody I went to school with was
super smart. They were all incredibly
hard working. Not all of them became
wildly successful.
>> Yeah. And you have to just acknowledge
how much of this is just serendipity.
And when a guy like that, who has no
false humility, when he says, "No, no, I
could give you 10 instances where my
life changed because of dumb luck," you
kind of have to acknowledge that, right?
>> That's what J. Paul Getty said. He said
the three successes the the the three
rules for getting rich are
go to work early, stay late, and strike
oil.
>> [laughter]
>> Fantastic. Before we get to the book
specifically, I want to talk a little
bit about your writing process and, you
know, your some of my favorite essays of
yours take historical stories, World
Wars, business failures, unlikely
successes.
Um and I specifically recall the Kitty
Hawk story and the solo sail competition
around the world.
And you connect them to timeless lessons
on behavior and money.
Tell us a little bit about your research
process. How do you find these amazing
and crazy stories?
I think it started with a survival
technique as a writer. Cuz as a finance
writer, if I got up every day and wrote,
"Here's what the Dow did today," you're
you're you're out. There's people who
can do that faster than you. You're not
really adding much value if if you do
that. And so as a writer, it was like,
"Hey, if I need to get people's
attention, I need to make it
interesting." And so and one of the ways
to do that, because myself as a reader,
what I enjoyed when other people did, is
when they tied the rest of the broader
world into finance. Here's a story that
has nothing to do with money. It's a
story about evolution or World War II,
whatever it might be. And let's take the
lesson from that and tie it. I loved
when people did that. I loved it, loved
it, loved it and wanted to do it myself.
The second part is I think it got you
closer to the truth. That when you study
those fields, whatever it might be,
politics or military history, you're
studying behavior.
And it's the same behaviors that impact
investors in the same way. And so a lot
of even finance professionals get into
trouble when they view and study finance
through the very narrow lens of finance
without realizing that it's a very broad
field of how people behave. So, that was
the first of it. The second is when you
start looking for it, when you have the
little seed in your head that when
you're reading about a broad array of
fields, if you have a little bird in
your head that says, "How does this tie
back? Like what is the behavior and how
can tie it back to money?" You see it
everywhere. You can't stop seeing it.
And you realize like how interconnected
our behavior is. Cuz the same way that
you and I think about risk and investing
also impacts a lot of things that we
think in life. Our friendships, our
relationships, our health tie back to
the same framework of how we think about
risk in money. It's very tied together.
The whole world is kind of woven
together in those. And so you start
seeing these same themes over and over
and over again about how compounding
works, how risk works, how envy works.
It's the same. And I also think if you
see a behavior repeat in several
different fields, you found something
that is like infinitely important. And
then you can be like, "Oh, that's a
that's a good one. I need to talk more
about that in finance." How often when
you're doing research you have that WTF
moment that's like, "Oh my god, how can
this possibly be true?" And you research
it and it's like, "Wow, not only is this
true, but it applies to so so many other
things." Is that a monthly occurrence, a
weekly occurrence? How often does that
happen? I think it's very often that you
find behaviors that also have have a
have a Venn diagram overlap with with
money. That's pretty often. In terms of
them being like a slam dunk of like,
"Oh, that is just a phenomenal
interesting story and it is so identical
to what happens in investing." That's
probably a once a year kind of thing.
>> Oh, really?
>> so. That's that's a really slam dunk. In
psychology and money, you have a bunch
of those and same as ever, you have a
run of those. There's a lot of that in
this.
You're less than 50 years old. You have
more than 50 of these stories.
>> Some better than others, though. I mean,
there there's a couple there's a couple
that that that that I've come across
over the years where I remember just
sitting back in my chair and being like,
"That's that's just a jackpot. That
story is just could not be better."
Uh seeing it. And you find it in these
areas that have nothing to do with
money. I remember so you you mentioned
in the artist spending money the story
about the sailors.
>> Yes.
>> That has has absolutely nothing to do
with money whatsoever. And I remember
reading it.
>> And everything to do with ego and
behavior.
>> Ego and behavior. But I remember reading
a an old New York Times article. It's
from not that old, I mean, 2007. And it
had one line. It said there was a
sailing race back in the 1960s and one
of the sailors was about to win but
decided he liked sailing, so he quit the
race and just kept sailing. And and
didn't want the publicity and all that
nonsense around it. The opposite of ego.
And I remember reading that being like,
"That's interesting. Like can we pull on
that thread a little bit more?" And you
start doing research and you're like,
"Oh, this is this is ego or the lack of
it. And of course that applies to money
in what I thought was just a slam dunk
way. Like that's a that's a rare story
find."
>> pull on that thread. People don't
understand the original quote from the
professor who said it was the plural of
anecdote is data. Yeah. And what was
meant by that is you start pulling on
the thread of these one-offs and you
find these broader things applicable to
to other things. Um you shouldn't just
dismiss a one-off because it's
anecdotal. Really really kind of
fascinating. So so um the other one that
has always stayed with me
uh involved Kitty Hawk. Yeah. How long
was it before the first Wright brothers
faster-than-air
flight made it into the New York Times?
It took them about 4 years to build the
airplane. And then after they flew it in
Kitty Hawk, it took them about another 4
years before virtually anybody was
paying attention. And there were years
after the Wright brothers' first flight,
we all have seen the picture, one of the
most famous pictures of all time now. It
was literally years after that took
place that the New York Times was
writing things along the lines of people
humans will never fly.
It will never happen.
>> It's already happened and they're saying
the wrong thing.
>> And there was even a periods back in
Dayton, Ohio, where they were from.
After Kitty Hawk, they went back to
Dayton. And Dayton is where they truly
mastered flying.
>> [clears throat]
>> They figured out the two hardest parts,
which are turning and landing. And uh
and Dayton was a a big city in the early
1900s. And they're flying like over
people's backyards
and there's virtually nothing written
about it. There was in in one of their
biographies it basically says that the
people in Dayton that saw them flying
assumed it must have been some sort of
magic trick. Asking like, "Where's the
rope?" Kind of kind of thing. Like it it
it the the equivalent
>> rope attached to? How do you
Well, it's it's, you know, it's all
turtles all the way down.
>> But it was the the analogy that was
given in their biography uh by by David
McCullough was if you and I saw a
demonstration of time travel today, we
would be like, "Okay, but it's just an
illusion. Like you didn't actually do
that. Like I saw I I saw what you did,
but that's but there's but there there
there's a trick here." And that's how
they viewed flying at the time. And it
it really took almost about half a
decade before people were like, "Oh,
this is this is the thing. This is this
is big." And I think that's true for a
lot of new technology that the gap
between uh discovering it and it
becoming a a world-changing thing can be
years if not decades. It's it's almost
never that it happens overnight that we
come up with a new technology and people
are like, "That's it. That's the thing."
People talk about how quickly ChatGPT
was
uh was was brought into the fold. You
know, within a year of it coming out,
there were hundreds of millions of
users. But AI has been a thing for 30
years, 40 years. So, the idea that like,
"Oh, we recognized it immediately." Like
no, it took a lifetime to get there. You
know, I saw I I saw a Reddit map and I
thought of you. It showed here's how far
you could travel 100 years ago from
London. And it was a map of this is a
day, this is a week, this is a month. Um
and then modern times, you can get
anywhere on Earth today within 36 hours.
Like the poles, whatever. But back then,
you couldn't even get to America in a
month from London. It was it's just
insane how that that changed and that's
what made me think of um Kitty Hawk. Uh
there's another quote of yours I love
that's related to all of your books,
which is
getting rich and staying rich are
different things that require different
skills. Explain that. Well, we we we we
all know the stories of the
the hedge fund manager who was very good
at getting rich and had no ability to
stay rich whatsoever. There's a lot of
stories about that.
>> Archegos, very recently. 20 billion to
zero. And the the more famous exam more
famous examples, Long-Term Capital
Management, Jesse Livermore. You can go
on down the list of people who are
unbelievably skilled at getting rich and
completely brainless at staying rich.
They're two very different skills. And
when you see either a person or a
company that has both equal skills of
getting rich and staying rich. It's a
rare thing. And some companies have
this. Microsoft has had that. Apple you
know
I would take that I would take Apple
back if they Microsoft since '99. They
went through a very rough period before
that. Microsoft is probably the
quintessential example of a country that
a company that is
Or country.
>> unbelievable at matter. unbelievable at
getting rich and has an equal ability at
staying rich in terms of how it manages
its balance sheet and staying relevant
what not. So it's it's a very rare skill
and it's often a contradictory skill
because you to get rich you need
optimism and risk-taking and to stay
rich you need almost the exact opposite.
You need a level of paranoia and
conservatism to keep you around. Like
you need that that Jekyll and Hyde
personality to do well over long periods
of time.
>> So the interesting thing about the
examples we both gave Arch goes and
long-term capital management. They got
rich through an excessive use of
leverage but in your book you talk about
the Vanderbilts which is kind of
fascinating. They got wealthy through
just wild business success, oil and
railroads and go down the list. And yet
once they had that money all they could
do is spend it at a profligate rate.
>> Yeah.
Derived seemingly no joy out of the
process and it took three or four
generations and they were the money was
all gone.
>> Pretty much. You know of all the robber
baron families here in New York who
who managed the money that the the the
Carnegies and the Rockefellers did did
very well at using their their huge
wealth to
better society and to make their their
heirs to to give them good lives and to
keep it around for several generations.
The Vanderbilts did by far the worst. By
far and away the worst. So when
Cornelius Vanderbilt died adjusted for
inflation he had about three or 400
billion dollars. Just you know an
unbelievable fortune. As you mentioned
within about three generations there was
virtually nothing left. And in between
those three generations were a series of
heirs who by and large with few
exceptions were miserable.
Were miserable miserable people. And the
reason why was very clear when you study
their biographies. The money
completely controlled their personality.
It told them who they could be. It told
them where they could live. It told them
the lifestyle they had to live. It told
them who they could marry. It told them
who they could be friends with. It had
complete and utter control about it.
They had all of the financial
independence that anyone in history
could ever imagine and they had no
intellectual independence. They had no
lifestyle independence. They had they
were completely dictated by the money.
And it wasn't until the money was more
or less exhausted that the first
Vanderbilt heirs who didn't get anything
could build a life of their own. And
this is now very well known. The first
Vanderbilt heir who virtually didn't get
anything is Anderson Cooper.
His mom was was was Gloria Vanderbilt.
>> who famously built her own fashion shop.
>> was that was effectively where the big
trust funds ended and Cooper has talked
about this that you know he was one of
the first people in his family in 150
years who could was like blessed with
the ability to build his own life. Where
the money didn't control it and dictate
it. And it's an amazing thing to watch.
Are are you the master of your wealth or
is your are you a slave to money? That's
it. Really is the key question. You know
you talked about the Rockefellers
um and uh versus the Vanderbilts.
I had the CIO of General Atlantic on and
General Atlantic is the money that comes
from the duty-free shops which has blown
up to be a spectacular fortune. The
founder you discuss in the book spent
most of his life giving away all his
money and he couldn't be happier. Tell
us about him. So the the founder is a
guy named Chuck Feeney. Passed away a
couple years ago. Unbelievable story
that he has. Started duty-free store.
Made for him personal fortune about 10
billion dollars. And this is 20 30 years
ago.
>> Yes. A lot of money. The well-known part
of Chuck Feeney's story that's been well
documented is that he gave 99.99%
of it away. During his lifetime not in
his will. I think this
>> Handed it out regularly.
>> I think this the statistic was he took
out two million dollars with an M to
live off of. Lived in a small apartment.
Flew coach. Lived like a complete and
utter ordinary person and gave 10
billion dollars away. That's the
well-known part of it. The less
well-known part of his story that I
think is is actually more important is
that if you go back to the '80s when he
first made his fortune he lived like a
billionaire. He had mansions and yachts
and a private jet and a private jet
lived like the quintessential
billionaire would. And hated it.
It essentially was not for him. He has a
quote that I love. He said, "I realized
that I was happy when I was giving money
away and I was not happy when I was not
giving money away." And so he chose he
he rejected that and chose to live this
very frugal life that he had. And what I
love about that is not that he lived
frugally. Like you know there there he
was he was he was kind of obsessive
about it in a way that I I would not do.
I don't think you would do.
>> front of the bus. You don't have to sit
in the back if you're giving away 10
billion dollars.
>> Sure. What but what I love about it is
that he chose it. He did not he did not
give any any care in the world what how
society told him to live. The money did
not dictate his personality. He did it
for himself. He was he was a truly
independent thinker. Could not be more
polar opposite than the Vanderbilts who
were absolutely beholden to what money
and society told them that they should
be.
Unbelievable. Another one of my favorite
quotes of yours
a big takeaway from economic history is
that the past wasn't as good as you
remember. The present
isn't as bad as you think and the future
will be better than you
>> to really clarify what you want out of
life. I lied. That wasn't the last
question. I have so many. You're leading
me down so many paths.
Starting with nothing's worse than
getting what you want but not what you
need. And there's a lot of that cuz for
if you are fortunate enough to have a
lot of money
earn a lot of money, save a lot of money
sometimes that's what that that's what
you want. That's exactly what you
wanted. That's what you set out to
achieve and you got it. Congratulations.
But very often it's not what you need.
What you needed were relationships,
health mental clarity, a clear
conscience. That's what you needed and
that's what would actually feed feed
your soul. And so I use the example in
the book. You you cited this earlier
when we were hanging out. Among the top
10 richest men in the world there are a
cumulative 15 divorces. Amazing.
>> And so they have everything that they
wanted in terms of money and lifestyle
and possessions and a lot of them
without passing too much judgment
at least at various times did not have
what they what they needed. What they
absolutely needed. And you can imagine
too that the 95-year-old billionaire
who's in very poor health. Everything he
wants not what he needs kind of thing.
But I think that that afflicts a lot of
people. You know I'm trying to remember
who it was. It might have been Noah
Smith. We we were involved in a group
discussion on wealth and happiness.
And I think it was Noah who said you
have to break the world into two groups
and
the group that's been divorced or is in
the middle of going through a divorce
the curve of their happiness relative to
their money looks totally different that
it's such a miserable experience almost
no amount of money is going to change
their head space and and you wrote
something related to that which is
unhappy people regardless of how much
wealth they have are always going to be
unhappy. That has to to a and happy
people the more money they get up into a
certain point
>> Right. continues to bring at least some
degree of happiness and perhaps some
contentment. How true is that? Are some
people just unhappy and nothing is ever
going to change that?
>> Yeah, I think that's true. I mean,
that's one of the most important little
quirks of the
broader topic of the relationship
between money and happiness. Does
earning more money make you happy?
The The asterisk there is that if you
start out as an unhappy, anxious,
depressed person, it's unlikely that
earning money is going to make you
happier. It's not going to fill the hole
that you needed to fill. But if you
start out as a pretty happy, joyful,
healthy, content person, earning more
money is is leverage on who you already
are. So, like in either direction, it's
just leveraging who you already were to
begin with. And so, yes, you can find
lots of examples of people who earned a
lot of money and had an amazing life.
The money made them very happy. Most of
those people still would have been happy
anyways if they earned less. And we can
find plenty of examples of the cranky,
old, crotchety billionaire. Right. And
they they probably would have been
cranky and crotchety. There's no amount
of money or success that would have
changed that at its core. Hm. That
That's really amazing. Really the last
question. So, right now, the psychology
of money is on pace to hit 10 million
copies. Since this segment is on your
writing process, as you were putting
this together, and I remember speaking
with you as you were writing this,
>> Yeah. and stitching together a whole
bunch of work, did you have any idea,
hey, I'm onto something, or did it just
feel like I got a deadline and I'm not
going to make it?
>> A 100% the latter. A 100% the latter. I
think it's true that in many aspects of
life that 90% of virality is is luck.
Or it's to use what we talked about
earlier.
>> Thompson and
and um
Hit Makers and how random um hit records
are and the impressionists and that book
just goes through a run of hey, but for
this, this, and this, none of these
things would be well-known and and
beloved. Is it really 90%? That's a wild
number.
>> And sometimes I'm making that up, but
that's what it feels like. I mean, the
first print run of Psychology of Money
was 5,000 copies cuz all the data that
we had at the time was that would be a
big success. And if you know anything
about publishing, selling 5,000 books is
is no small feat. Right.
>> 5,000 people to pull out their credit
cards and pay for your words, that's
that that's that's a that's that's a
success. Can I tell you, it's so funny
you say that?
I So, I read the the initial manuscript
over the summer.
>> Yeah. And then the hard copy shows up a
couple of weeks ago, and I went through
it a second time. And as I'm reading it,
I'm sitting on a big, comfortable
chair in a well-lit room with a lovely
view out back. Um and I'm thinking, you
know, I don't really need a lot of money
to be happiness. I just need 27 bucks to
buy a book to read each week. And what
is more delightful than either lying in
a hammock or sitting in a comfy chair
and taking 2,000 hours of somebody's
intellectual output for 27 bucks? Is
there a
bigger bargain in all of the world than
purchasing a well-written book? And a
and a $30 hammock and a nice view and a
and a and a and a warm cup of coffee. It
doesn't doesn't take that much.
>> Cup of tea while I'm Yeah. Absolutely.
So, the book shifts from your previous
writing, how we think about money, how
we make money,
to how we actually [clears throat] use
it. What What inspired that pivot?
I think a lot of it was
If If you asked me 5 years ago what my
investing philosophy is,
I I could sit here for hours and tell
you my philosophies of investing and why
I do what I do and what the logic is
behind it and how it fits my person. I
could talk to you all day about that.
And you and I have over the years talked
about that topic. But if you asked me 5
years ago, what is my my spending
philosophy? How do my wife and I think
about how we spend our money and what
not? I couldn't really tell you
anything. I hadn't really thought about
it. And and I look too, there are
literally tens of thousands of books
written about how to grow wealth. Tens
of thousands of books written about how
to grow wealth. Virtually none written
about what to do with it. Mhm. It's it's
one of the few areas in finance that
like has not been trampled over yet.
And I think part of the reason why is
cuz we intuitively assume that nothing
needs to be said about it. That yes, we
we know how complex markets are, and
that's also we can talk all day about
the intricacies of it. But when you talk
about like spending money, I think most
people's intuition at least is like you
just spend it. You just buy things and
then that's that's that's that's better.
It's all it's all good. And I think but
if you if you observe people, rich
people, poor people, everybody in
between, you realize it's not that
simple. That there are some people who
have gotten a lot out of spending money.
Have done it very well. Have used it as
a tool to live a better life. And
there's probably an equal number of
people who've done a very poor job about
it. For whom it controlled their
personality. Equal, I would say a lot
more.
>> Maybe more. They were chasing a phantom
life that they could never keep up with.
They were constantly tortured mentally
tortured by keeping up with the Joneses,
that kind of thing. That's actually
that's like there's such a deep
psychology of it in there. And so, what
what what the book does is I I don't
tell you how to spend because I I don't
know you. I don't I I don't know you.
>> subjective and it's not It's called the
art of spending money, not the science
of spending money.
>> Right. And I which also mirrors how I
think about investing. I don't think
there's a one right way to invest.
People have very different
personalities, different risk
tolerances, and whatnot. And it's the
same for spending. But I think the
psychology of how people think about
envy and contentment and happiness and
social aspiration, that tends to be
universal. So, that's what the book digs
into. I I love the quote, and I don't
remember who I'm stealing this from,
nothing is more infuriating than seeing
your idiot brother-in-law get rich.
>> J.P. Morgan. Unbelievable, right?
Absolutely true. There's a quote of
yours that I'm not going to steal. I'll
give you credit. And this speaks right
to how subjective our experiences are.
Your personal experiences make up maybe
0.0000001%
of what's happened in the world, but
perhaps 80% of how you think the world
works. I love that quote. Explain it.
You see it a lot in a lot of fields,
particularly politics, of the life that
you have lived, the experiences you've
had, the town that you live in, the
employment situation that you faced
during your life, makes up your view of
the world, your model of how the world
works, and therefore it influences what
you think should happen next. And
virtually everybody does this. That what
you have Nothing is more persuasive than
what you've experienced firsthand. And
you can go out of your way to try to
understand other people and be
empathetic of what they've been through,
but nothing makes more sense to you than
what happened to you personally. And
since we've all had very vastly
different lives, different generations,
different countries, different parts of
the world,
we all have different models of how we
think the world works. And and it's you
know, I I
a criticism of my first book, The
Psychology of Money, were were people
who would write and say,
what you wrote might be true for a
college-educated white American male.
Which is what you are. Which is what I
am. Guilty as guilty as charged. But
they would say in a way that I they were
absolutely right to say, it's different
for me in this country in this
generation, what whatever it may have
been. And I would say, yes, I I totally
get that. I I tried to make the point in
the book, but I'm still beholden to the
lens that I have lived as everybody is.
You know, the greatest thing you could
do to get out of your own little bubble
is just travel across the country by
car,
and suddenly you realize, oh, now I
understand. This is why farmers say what
they say. This is why people out in the
Midwest vote the way they do.
>> Yeah.
The country or the world, and it's
really a shame that Ameri- less than
50%. I don't know if the statistic is
still true. Less than 50% of Americans
have a passport. Used to be a data
point. I don't know if that's still
correct. But you get out in the rest of
the world and suddenly you say, oh,
we're not the only ones who know how to
do this. Other countries do this
specific thing better than us. We need
to be more open-minded about our narrow
little experience. And the better
question, if you see someone who thinks
or acts very differently than you,
the question you want to ask is not, why
do you believe that? It's, would I
believe the same thing if I were living
in your life? And almost all the time,
the answer is yes.
That if you were the farmer, you would
also vote the same way. That if you
lived in Russia or China or Venezuela,
you would also think the same way as
they do. And so, we it's very easy to
criticize them. Like you know, to to
criticize other people. Look at how dumb
they are making these decisions when you
would do the exact same thing if you
were in their shoes. So, so let's get
focused on the book cuz there are some
wonderful quotes and wonderful chapters
in it. One of the themes throughout is
the trade-off between wealth as a source
of freedom versus riches as a status
symbol. Explain the difference.
>> I I make I'm I make up these
definitions, so this is just my my view
of it, but I would define rich as
you have the income to buy the things
you want. You can make your mortgage
payment, you can make your car lease
payment, whatever. You you you can
purchase the lifestyle you want.
Wealth, I would say, is having some
level of independence over both
financial independence in order the the
ability to work where you want, as often
as you want, as take time off when you
need to, retire when you want to, but
also like intellectual independence. You
don't have to pander to other people.
You don't have to pander to a boss or to
clients or to regulators. You have the
independence to be who you are and wake
up every morning and say, I can do
whatever I want today. That's wealth.
And the interesting thing is there are
people who make millions of dollars a
year who are rich and have no wealth
whatsoever. And there are people who
make $50,000 a year who are not rich and
are extremely wealthy Your grandma, for
example.
>> I I use the example of my my late
grandmother-in-law in the book. For 30
years, she lived off of nothing but
1,700 or 1,800 dollars a month in social
security. She had no pension, no assets,
no nothing. She was broke. 1,700 bucks a
month social security. Happiest woman
you'll ever meet in your life. Happiest
woman you will ever meet ever. She was
perfectly content. She had no money, but
she didn't want any of it. She was
totally happy and content working in her
garden and going for walks and like bird
watching with her friends. It's all she
wanted to do. And so she had no
financial wealth and she was like off
the charts psychological wealth. She had
total control over her expectations.
Part of it was she was a child of the
Great Depression and like that. I'm sure
that had a had an impact on it. Back to
you know, we're we're just mirrors of
our past experiences, but
you and I know people who are extremely
wealthy on paper who are the opposite.
They might be billionaires. They have
financial wealth and they have no
psychological wealth. And unlike my my
late grandmother-in-law, she they they
wake up every morning being like it's
not enough. I need more. I need more. I
need more. So the difference between
financial wealth and psychological
wealth is a is a is a big part of it.
The most valuable financial asset is not
needing to impress anyone. The ability
to not need yourself to strangers is
priceless. I heard this How much of of
our bad spending behavior is just simple
simple
primate status seeking within the tribe?
I think a tremendous amount of it. Man,
you don't need to be to look very far to
see that. I heard this great quote from
the comedian Jimmy Carr recently. He
said in your 20s most people worry about
what other people think of them.
In your 30s you say I don't care what
anybody thinks of me. And in your 40s
you finally realize a truth which is
that nobody was thinking about you all
along.
>> [laughter]
>> And it's a it's such a wonderful it's
such a wonderful quote. The idea that
nobody is thinking about you as much as
you are and nobody cares about your
house, your clothes, your jewelry.
Nobody cares about it as much as you do.
They're busy worrying about themselves.
I think that realization at least for me
was so liberating to be like look, why
am I trying to peacock for strangers if
they're not even paying attention? What
I want to do is use money as a tool to
help the things and lever the things
that actually make me happy, which is
time with my kids, health, independence.
Like those things are great. But to the
extent that I'm just using it to try to
gain the attention of of strangers who
are too wrapped up in their own heads to
even pay attention to me, then that was
that was a very freeing and liberating
moment.
>> The spotlight bias is fascinating
because we're all the lead characters in
our own story, but in everybody else's
story we're, you know, walk-on actors,
extras just in the background. Yeah, I
mean I remember I remember seeing this
study of they would take somebody and
put them in like an an
an ugly sweater. And then they would
send them into a party. Mhm. And then
they would, you know, the person would
mingle around the party in this hideous
sweater. And then they would ask
everybody else at the party,
"Did you notice the woman in the ugly
sweater?" And everyone's like, "No." No.
No, didn't pay any attention.
>> I have a pimple over here that I've been
thinking about the whole time.
>> But if you asked the woman who was
wearing the ugly sweater, the the the
test subject, how many people noticed,
she basically said everybody.
>> Everybody. Every We always overestimate
the extent that other people are
thinking of us. Huh. That that's that's
amazing. Let's talk about time. Money's
greatest intrinsic value and this can't
be overstated, you wrote, is its ability
to give you control over your time. So
we know that's very true when it comes
to earning money and investing money.
Is it true when it comes to spending?
I've I've been a big saver for my whole
career. I know you have as well. When
when you know, I live below my means.
Save and invest the the majority of what
I make. And I've never viewed it as
saving money or delayed gratification. I
think I always viewed it as purchasing
independence. Mhm. And I get a benefit
out out of that right now today.
And I think that like [clears throat]
very simple reframing of it is
important. If you view it as saving
money, idle money, delayed
gratification, it feels like a burden.
It feels like work. And it feels like
yes, I have this wealth, but I I I need
to go deploy it like quickly. I think if
you view it as every dollar that I save
is a piece of my future that I own
and I get benefit out of that right now.
I I I get benefit out of knowing that
I'm independent today. It's not delayed.
As that's been an important shift in
thinking for me. That all I want out of
money is to be independent. I just want
to be able to wake up every day and say
I can do whatever I want today.
Even if most days I wake up and say I
want to work today. I want to be
productive.
It's my choice and I can do it on my
terms with the people who I like and
quit when I want to, do what I want to.
That is more valuable than any material
possession you can have. I really didn't
start spending money until my 50s. Like
I was a worker saver for most of my life
and it was only you know, once I never
had a midlife crisis,
but you start to realize and certainly
the pandemic I think very much made
everybody realize, "Hey, life is short
and you never know when your number
comes up.
>> Yeah. So what am I waiting for? I think
there was a lot of that going on.
>> Yeah. Have you made that pivot? Have you
like cuz I know I recall when you were
in DC and you were looking for houses
back on the West Coast. I remember you
wrestling with do I really want to buy a
big house? How many kids are we going to
have?
How how has that spending decision felt?
How has your personal spending changed?
>> and I have have loosened up over the
years. Very You and I have known each
other for I don't know, 15 years and
we've been we've spent a lot of time
personally together talking about our
own lives and whatnot. And you've known
I think you've probably given me playful
grief about how cheap I used to be. It's
always been a thing. I've always been or
I was for a long time very cheap, but I
was my wife and I were totally content.
And it always kind of not bothered me,
but I thought I found it interesting
that people would give me so much grief
about how little I spent when the truth
was like we were we we were living a
great life. We were we were thrilled
with what we did. And we've loosened up.
We spend considerably more money now
than we did 5 or 10 years ago,
but it's always just been on the
framework of independence cuz the truth
was 10 years ago I bought anything I
wanted. It just wasn't that much. I
didn't want that much. And today we buy
anything we want and it's just
marginally a little bit more cuz we have
kids and we've and we've you know, found
new things that bring us joy and
whatnot. And so it's always been I I
always feel like we've been in control
over it. Even when we were very frugal
or today when we've loosened up a little
bit. It's always been
our choice and not pushed or forced
about by social forces in society and
marketing. You know, it's funny. My my
wife is the conservative spender.
I'm I'm the value conscious spendthrift.
Yeah. So I will buy stuff, but it I have
to feel like I'm getting value for
money.
All the junk I've bought over the years,
watches, cars, houses, whatever.
Everything I own I could sell for more
than I paid cuz I feel like like I can't
imagine walking into a dealership and
saying to the the manager of the Ferrari
Ferrari
of Long Island, I'll I'll take that 500
it's unconscionable to me.
>> It's never too late for a midlife crisis
though. You can still figure it out. You
know,
it's not so much a midlife crisis as
it's been a post-pandemic life is short,
what are you waiting for? And in in the
office we are constantly telling clients
True story. I got a call from a a client
wants to buy a Ferrari and wants to buy
a sailboat. And someone says, "Oh,
Barry's a boater and he's a car guy.
Talk to him." And the answer I I told
him is you've never been a sailor. Why
are you going to spend $2 million
on a 50-ft sailboat that A needs a crew
and B you'll use twice and sell for a
half a million dollar
>> Yeah. depreciation. But by the way, this
guy can buy a Ferrari a month for the
rest of his life and still leave a nice
estate to his kids. Go buy the Ferrari
and not only buy the Ferrari, take the
kids to the Ferrari high-performance
driving class. Which
the dirty secret about all these racing
schools are effectively
defensive driving courses in drag. It's
all about staying within your skill set,
staying within the parameters of what
the car can do. You become a better
safer driver even though it's about apex
turns and high
>> [clears throat]
>> high-speed driving. And
he did he did that. He bought the
Ferrari, loves it, took the fam to the
course. Everybody had a great time.
Bought the boat, sold it a year later,
took a big hit. I'm not allowed to
mention the boat anymore. So But I but I
think I think you could easily imagine a
client that was the opposite. That
they're like sailing has always been my
dream. It's going to change my life.
>> Absolutely.
>> But and and and they loved it. And they
also bought a Ferrari and a week later
said, "Why did I do this?" It it really
depends on who you are what you are. The
joke about boaters is every boater's
favorite boat is their second to last
cuz they only always go one step too
far. No, no, the 40-ft was plenty. I
don't need a giant whatever. But but
that's very much
a case. So so let's bring this back to
the book and spending.
Talk about the connection between money
and happiness and what is spending for
contentment mean? How did the how does
happiness and contentment differ? I
think one of the issues with money and
happiness is that we chase the wrong
emotion. We chase happiness and it seems
very well-intentioned. Of course, I want
to be happier, you want to be happier.
That's great. The problem is that
happiness is always a fleeting emotion.
You people are rarely happy for more
than a couple minutes at a time. I think
it's very similar to humor where if I
told you the funniest joke you've ever
heard, you laugh for a couple minutes. A
couple seconds. Then you're on to the
next.
>> last for 10 years laugh for 10 years. It
just doesn't work that way. It's always
fleeting. So I think when you daydream
about the new house, the new car, the
boat, when you daydream about how great
that will feel,
by and large what you are imagining is
being content with those things. You
imagine yourself in the future house
sitting in the living room and what you
actually imagine is yourself being
saying, "I'm good. I'm totally I don't
need anything bigger. This is this is
what That's what feels good. The the
like picturing and imagining contentment
feels amazing. And I think that's what
people should aspire to. Not necessarily
happiness, but contentment. And I I
think that's that's always the goal
because you're not truly independent if
you're not fully content. You know,
that's to me that's the value of buying
a lottery ticket for two bucks isn't the
one in a billion chance that you're
going to win a hundred million dollars.
It's the 20 minutes you get to sit
around joking about what you would do
with a hundred million dollars. That's
fun. I remember having an argument with
my sister. We were kids. What do you
mean you wouldn't buy me a car? All
right, maybe I'd buy everybody a car.
What about this? What about buying a
house? And it was we were having this
hilarious debate. No one won anything.
It was a dollar lottery ticket. So so
that's always fascinating.
Um I love the story that Carl Richards
tells. For people who don't know who
Carl Richard is, he's the sketch guy
does these wonderful little diagrams,
had a New York Times column for for a
long time. And and he tells a story of
being big biker, loves cross country
biking. There was a bike he was jonesing
for. $6,000 for this really high-end
ultra-lightweight titanium bank bike and
he couldn't bring himself to pull the
trigger and his wife says, "You bike
four times a week. Go buy it." And he
said a year later it's the best purchase
he ever made. He goes out with friends.
He has these memories from it. It's been
wonderful. How do you distinguish
between the purchases that are that are
going to bring you joy and the purchases
that are just empty, unsatisfying
baubles? I think you kind of hit the
nail on the head there when you said
Carl buying the bike. It was great
because of the experience because he
goes out with his friends and he creates
all these memories with it. And like
that's what made him happy. Not
necessarily the bike. It was what the
bike allowed him to do. I think it's
similar for homes where will buying a
big mansion make you happier? Uh the
answer might be yes if it makes it
easier to have your friends over. And
have your friends over.
>> tell in the book about people who have
houses that feel like hotels. They're so
large. Needs a staff of 400 to run.
Nobody's happy in those houses.
>> Right. And you can compare that to
someone who lives in a 1,500 square foot
house
but has their friends over every Friday
for a barbecue and they stay up to 1:00
in the morning laughing with each other.
That's a better life. That's a way
better. So it's not what the possessions
can do. It's how can they or what the
possessions are. It's how they can serve
as a conduit into things that make you
actually happier. And for everyone those
things exist. It's like maybe buying a
bigger house will make you happier. And
buying a cool car if you're spending
time with your friends and you're going
you're taking your kids to to to track
races and what not. Are you talking
about? Maybe that that does make you
happier. But it's usually not a direct
thing cuz you can easily imagine buying
the mansion but having no friends,
having no family. And you're sitting
there alone and then you're wondering
why you feel unfulfilled. Why did you
dream for years of having this house and
now you're sitting in it and you're like
I don't I don't feel anything. Cuz what
the the only situation which would
actually make you happier and more
content is what it would serve as a
lubricant for for bringing other people
over that actually make you happy.
>> Quick quick car story that I think
you'll appreciate. So one of my projects
was taking a a 300,000 km
'87
1987 911 coupe that had been in
accident, single owner for like 25
years.
Uh body and the interior was in really
good shape but it needed a lot of
mechanical work. And um I take took this
long story short, converted it to an EV.
It's a long process. And I was kind of
horrified at all the Porsche purists who
would just torch me for doing
such blasphemy. And a friend owns a
detailing and wrap shop and he hosts a
big cars and coffee every year. And he's
like, "Hey, can you bring the EV?"
I don't really know if I want to do
that. I'm going to get, you know, really
beaten up over it. He's like, "Trust me,
it's a great crowd." All right. So and
and this car ended up costing me
everything said and done about what it
would have cost me to walk into a
Porsche dealership and say, "Give me
that 911 brand new." And not in Probably
the same is true where you live where I
live 911s are Camrys. They're
everywhere. Right? They're they're
valuable but they're not rare whereas
Ferraris are rare and valuable. So I
bring the All right, I'll bring the EV
and I bring it to this event. There's
about 50 60 70 cars and I'm right across
the way from a guy with a the brand new
half a million dollar Ferrari Cilindri.
It's it's new front engine 12 cylinder.
And so I open the front where there's a
big battery pack and I open the back
where the engine's supposed to be and
there's another battery pack with a
Tesla motor on the bottom. And I just
brace myself for people
coming up and just like, "Ah, you
destroyed this car." And I was so wrong.
People were fascinated. And by the end
of the day I felt bad for the guy with
the Ferrari cuz he was there by himself.
No one was talking to him. I had a
steady stream of people saying, "Wow,
this is really cool. This is different.
This is a one-off." It doesn't hurt that
the license plate is EV911. It's the
first one in New York.
That was genuinely surprising to me that
it wasn't something that you could just
buy. It was something that created a
little required a little thought, a
little creativity.
>> Yeah. And fostered new relationships for
you.
>> And I Oh God, I peop- people giving me
cards. Hey, I want to I'm I'm hosting
this event. Can you bring this car? Like
it was and every time I bring that car
anywhere people lose their minds.
>> That's great. It's so it's so
fascinating and it wasn't a function of
spending a boatload of money. It was a
function of, "Hey, this is kind of odd,
kind of different." I you have every
time I spend money you're in the back of
my head.
Um
I want to go through a couple more
quotes before we get to our favorite
questions.
Um
you cite the University of Pennsylvania
professor Killingsworth.
>> Yeah.
>> [clears throat]
>> If you're already an unhappy person,
it's unlikely that more money will ever
fix your problems.
>> Yes. It's going to leverage who you are
in either direction. Either direction.
And then our friend Michael Batnick said
something
I hope I'm not talking out of class.
Um wealth seems like a burden and an
obligation. The people I know have
become wealthy, other people treat them
differently. They always have their
hands out. At a certain point it doesn't
seem like it's worth it.
I think I think everyone can make it
worth it but it's easy for it to spiral
out of control and to let it change the
what other people think of you, your
family, your friends, the rest of
society. And so it's very easy to think
that when we are spending a lot of money
we are gaining people's admiration. But
you have to be careful cuz often what
you are the emotion you are fostering is
envy. That other people envy you. And
that's and that it's it's hard in real
time to know which is which. You're
like, "Oh, they're looking at me they're
looking at me. They're talking about me
they're talking about me. Like they
admire me." No, they envy you which
means they hate you.
So that's a good point to bring up FOMO.
FOMO is recklessness masked as ambition.
Explain.
>> It's outsourcing your critical thinking
to other people.
And those other people got rich quickly
which of course is going to is going to
inhibit their own ability to think
rationally and cleanly about it. It's a
very dangerous thing. Let's talk about
wealth as everything you don't see which
is effectively
double entry accounting. You see the
asset, you don't see the liability.
>> Yeah, I can see your house. I can see
your car. You're not your your your
EV911 car. I can't see your bank
account. I can't see your brokerage
statement. I can't see how much you save
for retirement. Like all wealth is
actually hidden. Cuz wealth is the money
that you didn't spend. It's the cars you
didn't buy, the vacations you didn't
take. It's money that you've saved for
independence. And it's completely
invisible. And it's pretty pernicious
because if you think of like for
physical health, you you can see
physical health. This person's
overweight. This person's ripped. There
you can you can see it. And so it's easy
to find a role model. I want to look
more like that person, less like this
person. For money it's very difficult to
do because you can't see wealth. You
don't see the debt. You don't see the
leverage.
>> see the leverage. You don't see what
went into it. And of course there are a
lot of people who appear to be wealthy
who are absolutely broke. And the
reverse is true. So it's very difficult
to know who to follow, who to take your
cues from.
If you're I love this quote and this is
your words. If you're a good dad, a good
husband, an honest person, a hard
worker, a helpful friend, and a funny
joke teller, you've probably earned 98%
of the respect and admiration that I'm
capable of giving you. If you happen to
be rich and successful, I might bump
that up to 99%.
>> not pretend it makes much difference. I
I I told that to a good friend of mine
who is one of my favorite people in the
entire world. Earns a a modest but not
substantial income and it bothers him.
And I I just told him that one day. I
was like, "Look, if you have these like
if you're a good husband, a good father,
if you're fun to hang out with and
you're funny, I've that's about all the
respect and admiration I can give you.
And if you happen to make more money
like okay, kind of cool. Maybe that
brings some more stories and what not
but it doesn't make much difference. I
like you for this stuff, not the stuff
that you're actually chasing." Last
question before we get to our favorites.
What do you think people don't know
about the art of spending money but
should? What's the most important aspect
of this that just seems to slip by
unnoticed?
>> Probably that there's no formula for it.
That what works for you might not work
for me and vice versa. And a lot of
people get into trouble with finance,
whether it's investing, earning, or
saving, or spending, when they follow
the advice that is good for one person
but not for them. And it's a very
vicious trap to get into because because
it worked for somebody else. You're
like, "Oh, I just that's that that's
what I should do. It worked for them it
it surely should work for me." You have
to spend more time kind of looking in
the mirror so to speak and figuring out
who you are, what you want. Really
really great insight. All right, let's
jump to our favorite question starting
with
Who were your early mentors who helped
shape your career?
I would be lying and I'm not blowing
smoke if I said you and Josh. I think in
equal amounts.
>> to have to explain that cuz it doesn't
make sense.
>> this would have been 2013. Mhm. We're
some of the first people who recognized
me outside of The Motley Fool. Mhm. Who
broke me out of that. Now, I was I was
I felt good and was comfortable within
the zone of The Motley Fool for their
members or whatnot. I had a pretty big
audience there. It was pretty good. You
and Josh were the first ones outside of
The Motley Fool who recognized me and I
feel like that was it was unbelievable.
And I I think about this a lot of like
when you see somebody like that
particularly if they're young
anything you can say or do to help them
is enormous. It might be the smallest
thing in the world to DM them or reach
out and say, "Hey, you're you're doing
some good work. I'm really proud of you.
I like your stuff." It takes you nothing
and it can completely change their life.
Nothing brings me more joy than hearing
people say things like that. Cuz Well,
that's that's the only nice thing I'll
say about you today.
Cuz the thing that's so amazing is these
are throwaway lines that you say, "Hey,
really like that column. Really like
that piece. I thought it was that to you
it's 3 seconds and of little bit of
honesty and someone says, "This was
really meaningful that I kind of felt
like I was lost or I kind of felt like
no one was appreciating me and just
hearing that somebody recognized that I
had some skill and talent was huge. You
forget what it was like when you were in
your 20s and 30s
>> Yeah. grinding away unnoticed for decade
or so, right? How long were you with The
Motley Fool before
>> there for 10 years before I left. But I
I remember when you and Josh did that
for me. It was 2013. That's how you
know, I vividly I remember it. And I
remember how much the confidence boost
that it gave me to keep going was was
enormous.
>> Well, well, that's lovely of you to say.
I really really appreciate it. Both of
us have an eye for talent. I could I
could I could say that and and you have
um fulfilled all of our uh
highest aspirations for you.
Let's talk about books. What are you
reading right now? What are some of your
favorites?
Mhm. And I know when you finish writing
a book
like the whole process, you're not
reading anything other than research.
>> Yeah. Um so, talk about your favorites.
I'm reading a book right now by by by
Stefan Zweig who was a journalist in the
in the 20th century and he wrote his
memoirs which is basically about how the
world went from he was he was living in
in Austria in in Vienna. And how the
world went from before World War I
Europe was so civilized and so great and
everyone viewed that that was just
continue indefinitely. That it was so
organized and so polite and so but which
of course is somewhat of an
exaggeration, but that was the view that
he had. And then he talks about how the
world changed both with World War I and
then especially with World War II. And
how everything happened that nobody
thought would have been possible before
it happened. And how culturally and
socially that world changed. So, that's
that's what I'm reading right now.
>> Thank goodness something like that would
never happen here.
>> [laughter]
>> Exactly, right. Um let's talk about
streaming. What are you listening or or
watching these days be it I
I don't want you This isn't another
solicitation for a compliment, but what
are you watching? What are you listening
to?
>> I finished Succession not too long ago.
>> How did you like it? It starts out so
good.
>> best I've ever seen. No, no, no. And I I
didn't take that at all. One of the best
I've ever seen. I loved every second of
it. I hated the first episode. I don't
like any of these people.
>> Oh, but that's the point. I loved every
second of Succession. And then I just
finished Your Friends & Neighbors on
Apple.
>> Really good. I really enjoyed that.
>> I can't wait for the second season.
>> just gets better and better. So good.
And if when that first came out, he
hosted Saturday Night Live and I want to
say the best episode all season.
>> So good. I can't I can't I can't wait
for the second season of that.
>> There's a lot of status, spending
>> death earning. I mean, it fits right
into the sweet spot of what you write
about.
>> such good writing character development
there. Our final two questions, what
sort of advice would you give a recent
college grad who is interested in a
career in either investing or writing
about finance? Read as much as you
possibly can. It's very boring advice,
but that's everyone. No one has more
confidence in their ability or where
they think the world is going than a
21-year-old man who's never read a book
about history or investing. Nobody
thinks they've figured it out more than
that. And spend as much time as you
possibly can reading as much as you can
from the diverse field of of topics that
you can.
And our final question, what do you know
about the world of investing, writing,
earning and spending today that would
have been useful back in the financial
crisis when you were first launching
your career? We mentioned diverse things
there like writing and spending and I
actually think I have very similar
philosophies on both which is when I
write, I want to write for an audience
of one which is me. Mhm. I just want to
write things that I think are
interesting telling stories that I think
are are funny and unique. And if other
people like them too, that's wonderful.
But I know that I can't please everybody
and that's just an inevitable part of
it. So, if I'm going to pander to one
person, it might as well be myself. And
I think that's how I spend money, too. I
spend to please myself and my family.
And I don't care if other people do it
differently. I don't care if other
people think it's the wrong way to do
it. It's what works for me. And again,
if I'm going to pander to anyone in how
I spend, it might as well be myself.
Well, thank you, Morgan, for coming in.
This is everything I I was expecting it
to be. We have been speaking to Morgan
Housel, author of The Psychology of
Money, same as ever, and the new book
The Art of Spending, Simple Choices for
a Richer Life. If you enjoyed this
conversation, check out any of the 581
podcasts we've done over the past 11
years. You can find those at iTunes,
Spotify, YouTube, Bloomberg, wherever
you find your podcasts. And check out my
new book How Not to Invest, The Ideas,
Numbers, and Behavior that destroy
wealth and how to avoid them at your
favorite bookstore. I would be remiss if
I did not thank the crack team that
helps put these conversations together
each week. Alexis Noriega is my video
producer. Anna Luke is my podcast
producer. Sage Bowman is the head of
podcast here at Bloomberg. Sean Russo is
my researcher. I'm Barry Ritholtz.
You've been listening to Masters in
Business on Bloomberg Radio.